{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 New York: The Cradle of the Women's Rights Movement\
New York played a central role in the formal launch of the women's rights movement. In June 1848, before the Seneca Falls Convention, the Liberty Party convention in New York approved a resolution calling for universal suffrage, including women\
. Their presidential candidate, Gerrit Smith (cousin of Elizabeth Cady Stanton), gave a speech advocating women's suffrage, and Lucretia Mott was nominated for vice-president, the first time a woman was proposed for federal executive office\
.\
The Seneca Falls Convention, considered the first women's rights convention, was held in Seneca Falls, New York, on July 19\'9620, 1848\
. It was organized by women, primarily Quakers, including Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, who had previously discussed the need to organize for women's rights. The convention was advertised as a discussion of "the social, civil, and religious condition and rights of woman". Held at the Wesleyan Chapel, a venue known for hosting reform lectures, the convention attracted about 300 attendees\
.\
Stanton and Quaker women drafted two key documents for the convention: the Declaration of Sentiments and a list of resolutions\
. Modeled on the U.S. Declaration of Independence, the Declaration of Sentiments included a list of grievances against the treatment of women, demanding government reform and changes in traditional male roles. Stanton, drawing on extracts of unjust laws provided by her husband, Henry Stanton, added the radical demand for women's voting rights to the resolutions and grievances. This demand generated heated debate, with some, like Lucretia Mott, initially urging its removal as too extreme. However, Frederick Douglass, the sole African American attendee, argued powerfully for its inclusion, and the resolution for women's suffrage was passed. Exactly 100 attendees signed the Declaration of Sentiments\
.\
The Declaration of Sentiments became crucial in spreading news of the women's rights movement nationally\
. Reactions in the press varied, from positive recognition of the convention as an "era in the progress of the age" to ridicule. Horace Greeley in the New York Tribune acknowledged that refusing women the right to vote lacked adequate reason\
.\
Following the Seneca Falls Convention, attendees organized the Rochester Women's Rights Convention in Rochester, New York, just two weeks later\
. Lucretia Mott was a featured speaker. This convention was notable for being the first women's rights convention to be chaired by a woman, Abigail Bush, a step considered radical at the time\
.\
These New York conventions spurred a series of other local and state women's rights conventions across the country\
. The first in a series of annual National Women's Rights Conventions began in Worcester, Massachusetts, in 1850. New York continued to host these national conventions in Syracuse (1852), New York City (1856, 1858, 1859, 1860, 1866). It was at the 1852 convention in Syracuse, NY, that Susan B. Anthony and Matilda Joslyn Gage made their first public speeches on women's rights. Anthony, convinced that suffrage was the primary right needed, began her extensive work for the movement, including petition campaigns in New York state\
.\
The movement faced opposition and ridicule\
. Anti-abolitionist sentiment, sometimes intertwined with anti-women's rights views, led to riots in New York City in 1834, during which homes and businesses of abolitionists and black neighborhoods were attacked. These riots reflected a combination of nativism and tensions between working-class whites and free black people. Women attempting to speak publicly were particularly targeted\
.\
Civil War and Reconstruction\
The American Civil War (1861\'961865) caused a temporary suspension of many women's rights activities\
. However, women's rights leaders like Stanton and Anthony remained active, focusing on the abolition of slavery. In 1863, they organized the Women's Loyal National League in New York, the first national women's political organization, which gathered nearly 400,000 signatures on petitions to abolish slavery. The League emphasized that petitioning was the only political tool available to women lacking the vote and demonstrated the value of formal organization and political action\
.\
After the Civil War, the movement reorganized. In May 1866, Stanton and Anthony called the Eleventh National Women's Rights Convention in New York City\
. This convention transformed itself into the American Equal Rights Association (AERA), dedicated to campaigning for equal rights, especially suffrage, for all citizens regardless of race or sex. Leaders included Stanton, Anthony, Lucretia Mott, Frederick Douglass, and Lucy Stone\
.\
A sharp division emerged within the AERA over the proposed Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution\
. The Fourteenth Amendment, intended to grant citizenship to African Americans, was the first to introduce the word "male" into the Constitution in relation to voting. The Fifteenth Amendment would prohibit denying suffrage based on race, effectively enfranchising black men. Stanton and Anthony opposed the Fifteenth Amendment, arguing that suffrage should be granted to all women and African Americans simultaneously, warning that its passage would create an "aristocracy of sex" and delay women's suffrage for decades. Frederick Douglass, while supporting women's rights, argued that this was "the Negro's hour" and supported the amendment as a crucial step, believing a universal suffrage amendment could not pass at that time. This disagreement led to the dissolution of the AERA and a split in the women's rights movement\
.\
In 1868, Anthony and Stanton began publishing a weekly newspaper in New York City called The Revolution\
. It focused on women's rights, particularly suffrage, and covered issues like politics, labor, and finance. Its motto was "Men, their rights and nothing more: women, their rights and nothing less"\
.\
Following the split, Stanton and Anthony, along with others, formed the National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA) in New York in May 1869\
. This organization initially pursued a wider range of women's issues and focused on a national suffrage amendment. The rival American Woman Suffrage Association (AWSA) was formed later that year, focusing more on state-level campaigns and maintaining ties with the Republican Party\
.\
Inspired by the Fourteenth Amendment, the New Departure strategy emerged, arguing that the Constitution implicitly enfranchised women\
. The NWSA adopted this strategy in 1871, encouraging women to attempt to vote and file lawsuits if denied. In 1872, Susan B. Anthony was arrested in Rochester, New York, for voting in the presidential election. Her widely publicized trial and conviction became a major event, although she refused to pay the fine and no further action was taken against her. This event significantly shifted the focus of the broader women's rights movement toward women's suffrage. In 1875, the Supreme Court ruled in Minor v. Happersett that the Constitution does not confer the right to vote, ending the New Departure strategy and leading the NWSA to focus on campaigning for a constitutional amendment. In 1878, Anthony and Stanton arranged for the introduction of a women's suffrage amendment in Congress, which would later be known as the "Susan B. Anthony Amendment"\
.\
Anthony and Stanton also began the massive project of writing the History of Woman Suffrage in 1876, working from Stanton's home in New Jersey and drawing on Anthony's extensive collection of historical materials\
.\
The Fight for the Federal Amendment and New York's Victory\
The two rival suffrage organizations eventually merged in 1890 to form the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), with Stanton as its first president and Anthony as its effective leader\
. While state-level campaigns continued, the push for a national amendment was revived by Alice Paul, who formed the National Woman's Party (NWP) in 1916, separate from the NAWSA. The NWP adopted militant tactics, such as the Silent Sentinels picketing the White House, and endured arrests, imprisonment, and force-feeding\
.\
Crucially, New York granted women the right to vote through a state referendum in November 1917\
. As the most populous state at the time, this victory was highly significant. Opposition to suffrage, including from some businesses and political machines like Tammany Hall in New York City, was still present, but by 1917, some wives and daughters of Tammany Hall leaders were involved in the suffrage movement, leading the machine to take a neutral stance, which was important for the referendum's passage\
.\
The movement's relentless campaigning, combined with women's contributions during World War I and suffrage victories in other states and countries, increased pressure for a national amendment\
. In 1918, President Woodrow Wilson publicly endorsed the federal suffrage amendment. Finally, the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, prohibiting the denial of voting rights based on sex, was ratified on August 18, 1920\
.\
Beyond the 19th Amendment\
While the 19th Amendment was a monumental victory, it did not immediately secure voting rights for all women. State laws like poll taxes, literacy tests, and "moral character" requirements, as well as discriminatory practices, continued to disenfranchise many African American women, men, and other minority groups, particularly in the South, until the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965\
. Native American women on reservations were generally not guaranteed voting rights until the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, and faced continued barriers afterward. Restrictions based on married women's citizenship status also presented challenges\
.\
After 1920, the National Woman's Party continued to advocate for full equality and the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), which was proposed in 1923\
. The ERA passed Congress during the second wave of feminism in 1972 but failed to be ratified by enough states\
.\
New York's legacy in the women's rights movement is commemorated in various ways. The Women's Rights National Historical Park in Seneca Falls, NY, preserves sites related to the 1848 convention, including the Wesleyan Chapel and Elizabeth Cady Stanton's home\
. Activists like Stanton, Anthony, Sojourner Truth, and Amelia Bloomer are remembered, including in memorials and national recognition}